Computing begins its history as the practice of counting numbers and systems. Ancestral tools of counting include Inca's Quipu, Sumerian abacus, Tally Sticks. Through these tools, counting numbers was a practice associated, though not constrained to, banking, census, and processes requiring mechanical thinking. It was not only mathematical computation, but also the storage and manipulation of information that made these tools computing ancestors. The concept of mechanical thinking, here, can be parallel to the concept of *algorithm*. The methods of computation are manual: the algorithm requires human intervention in order to proceed.

An idea of mechanical calculation develops through the years with the *Pascaline* *(1642)*, the *Arithmometer,* the *Universal Calculator (1784)*. We see the first ideas of digital automation with Babbage's *Difference Engine*. The narrative of the Difference Engine is a distorted narrative of needs: Babbage's motives were theoretical, while the machine was accepted in the industry for its utilitarian motive (eliminate errors in tables), Babbage wasn't really frustrated with errors.

There's a material culture to computing. Personal note is that there was a size modularity to it. Computational machines had the potential to solve more complex problem if they only grew bigger in size. The trend of ever smaller transistors and integrated circuits did not made the more complex problem solvable but also set the stage for ever bigger needs. Smaller computing devices made for bigger network infrastructures. Smaller storage devices made for bigger data centres. Smaller size at the user side comes at the cost of bigger size elsewhere.

In devices there has always been a functional distinction and a physical distinction. We could categorise communication devices separately from computation devices or information management devices. With the rise of general purpose computing, and with the advent, in the 70s, of submicron geometry (transistors), the distinctions are destroyed, to the atomic level. The silicon revolution has defied otherwise conventional categories, while the convergence of these classes meant the death of them.

A few notes on mechanical: Turing and Neumann say *mechanical is unthinking*. Mechanical in their view does not presume higher consciousness. In 19th century culture suffered an industrialisation of thought, reflected in contemporary language ("manufacturing of numbers", "mechanical fabrication of tables").

 What is music but numbers closed in sound? What made modern computing was the realisation that power of computing comes from representational power of numbers. Ada Lovelace understood this and sketched the analytical engine in 1848. Modern computing is computation where numbers represent entities other than just quantity. There is, however, a fallacy: the grammar of the code is not the same as the grammar of the phenomena that is being modelled. This limitation was ignored as the opportunity for simulation and modelling was (and remains) more important than the actual phenomena.